Flail chest is a life-threatening chest
wall injury where multiple adjacent ribs are
fractured in at least two places, creating
a free-floating
segment of the thoracic cage.
Instead of moving outward during
inspiration, this unstable segment moves
inward, a phenomenon called paradoxical
movement.
This disrupts normal ventilation and
significantly increases the work of breathing.
But the real danger is not just the rib
fractures,
it's the underlying pulmonary contusion.
The lung tissue beneath the injury becomes
bruised, edematous,
and filled with fluid, leading to
decreased compliance,
impaired gas exchange, and worsening
oxygenation over time.
That means patients may initially appear
stable but deteriorate hours later.
Clinically, these patients present with
chest pain,
shallow breathing, tachypnea, and visible
paradoxical
chest movement.
Breath sounds may be diminished, and
oxygen saturation often drops
as perfusion mismatch worsens.
As an RT, your assessment should focus on
work of
breathing, air movement, oxygenation,
and signs of fatigue.
Diagnostics typically include chest x-ray,
but CT scan is
more sensitive and can better identify rib
fractures and pulmonary contusion.
ABGs may initially show mild hypoxemia but
can progress to respiratory failure if not
managed aggressively.
Management focuses on three priorities,
oxygenation,
pain control, and ventilatory support.
Oxygen therapy is essential, but adequate
pain control is critical
because if the patient can't breathe
deeply, they will hypoventilate
and develop atelectasis or pneumonia.
This is why regional anesthesia or
epidural analgesia is often preferred.
For patients with increasing work of
breathing or hypoxemia, non-
invasive ventilation may be used, but many
will require intubation
and mechanical ventilation.
In these cases, positive pressure
ventilation stabilizes the internally and
improves oxygenation.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
rising PaCO2,
fatigue, altered mental status, and
decreasing
air movement.
These signal impending respiratory failure
and the need for rapid escalation.
From an RT perspective, your role is
critical,
monitoring ventilation and oxygenation,
supporting airway clearance,
optimizing ventilator settings, and
recognizing early signs of deterioration.
Bottom line, flail chest is both a
mechanical and pulmonary
problem.
Treat the pain, support ventilation, and
always watch for delayed respiratory
decline.